Closes #2952, #2900 tte: add end_dates and event_type argument to derive_param_tte() [create website] (#2988)
pharmaverse/admiral: vignettes/tte_analyses.Rmd

    "003",    "WEEK 16",     79,
    "004",    "BASELINE",    66,
    "004",    "WEEK 4",      77,
    "004",    "WEEK 8",      79
  ) %>%
    mutate(
      PARAMCD = "B",
      PARAM = "Score B"
    )
) %>%
  mutate(
    STUDYID = "XY1234",
    AVISITN = case_when(
      AVISIT == "BASELINE" ~ 0,
      AVISIT == "WEEK 4" ~ 4,
      AVISIT == "WEEK 8" ~ 8,
      AVISIT == "WEEK 12" ~ 12,
      AVISIT == "WEEK 16" ~ 16,
      TRUE ~ NA_real_
    ),
    ABLFL = if_else(AVISIT == "BASELINE", "Y", NA_character_)
  ) %>%
  derive_var_base(by_vars = exprs(USUBJID, PARAMCD)) %>%
  derive_var_chg() %>%
  mutate(
    CHGCAT1 = case_when(
      CHG <= -10 ~ "WORSENED",
      CHG > -10 & CHG < 10 ~ "UNCHANGED",
      CHG >= 10 ~ "IMPROVED",
      TRUE ~ NA_character_
    )
  ) %>%
  derive_vars_merged(
    dataset_add = adsl,
    by_vars = exprs(USUBJID, STUDYID)
  ) %>%
  mutate(
    ADT = TRTSDT + AVISITN * 7,
    ANL01FL = if_else(ADT <= TRTEDT, "Y", NA_character_)
  ) %>%
  derive_vars_dy(reference_date = TRTSDT, source_vars = exprs(ADT, TRTSDT, TRTEDT)) %>%
  arrange(USUBJID, PARAMCD, AVISITN)

adqs_a <- filter(adqs_all, PARAMCD == "A")
```

```{r, echo=FALSE}

> plot_scenario <- function(assessment_type, event_type) {

Reviewer: Just to say, these plots are awesome :D

        geom_text(
          data = dataset_tte,
          aes(
            x = ADY,
            y = USUBJID,
            label = if_else(CNSR == 0, "Event time", "Censoring time")
          ),
          hjust = "center",
          nudge_y = 0.5,
          inherit.aes = FALSE
        )
    } else {
      final_plot <- final_plot +
        coord_cartesian(clip = "off") +
        geom_segment(
          data = dataset_tte,
          aes(
            x = ADY,
            xend = ADY,
            y = -0.7,
            yend = 0.4
          ),
          inherit.aes = FALSE,
          arrow = arrow(type = "closed", length = unit(0.07, "inches"))
        ) +
        geom_text(
          data = dataset_tte,
          aes(
            x = ADY,
            y = -0.2,
            label = if_else(CNSR == 0, "Event time", "Censoring time")
          ),
          hjust = "left",
          nudge_x = 1.5,
          inherit.aes = FALSE
        )
    }
  }

  final_plot
}
```

# Introduction

The basic concept of preparing data for time-to-event analyses is quite simple:

- we need to know whether the event occurred or not
- if it did, the first time when it occurred is set as the _event time_

> - if it did not, the last time when it is known that the subject didn't had an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- if it did not, the last time when it is known that the subject didn't have an
```

Reviewer 2: Could we **bold** the event time and censoring time in this opening intro?

Author: Updated

event is set as the _censoring time_.

Depending on the definition of the event and the collection of the data, the
creation of a time-to-event ADaM dataset can be more or less complex. In this
vignette, we will discuss different scenarios and how to derive the essential
variables `CNSR` and `ADT`. For a complete programming workflow see the
[Creating a BDS Time-to-Event ADaM](bds_tte.html) vignette.

# Observation Period

The observation period is the time during which the subjects are at risk of
experiencing the event. Usually it starts at the beginning of the treatment. The
end of the observation period is study- or analysis-specific. It may be derived
from more than one date, e.g., the end of the treatment plus a fixed time, the

> end of the study, death, the start of an alternative treatment, ...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
end of the study, death, the start of an alternative treatment, etc.
```

Author: updated

The records of the input datasets need to be restricted to the observation
period. This can be done by deriving `ANLzzFL` variables in the input datasets
and then filtering the records based on these flags.

Another option is to use the `end_dates` argument of the `derive_param_tte()`
function to specify the dates which restrict the observation period. The input
records are then automatically restricted to records before the specified end
dates.

# Scenarios

There are three main scenarios to consider when deriving time-to-event datasets:

## Continuous Assessments

The simplest case are events which are assessed continuously, e.g., death or
adverse events. These can occur at any time within the observation period. It is
assumed that the event didn't occur if no event is recorded. In this case, the
event time is the time of the first occurrence of the event and the censoring
time is the end of the observation period.

```{r, echo = FALSE}

> plot_scenario(assessment_type = "continuous", event_type = "negative")

Reviewer: Can each of these (or at least the ones where it's relevant) have a caption saying what the important things to notice from the plot are?

Author: Yes, good idea.

I've added captions to the plots. Let me know what you think.

Reviewer: Titles look good. I've noticed two things though:
- there are three "Event/Censoring Times for Confirmed Worsening" plots. is that intended?
- in dark mode, the yellow highlight doesn't show up very clearly
<img width="1305" height="608" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ae029869-e5de-4842-9898-0f23cb865d0e" />

Author: > * there are three "Event/Censoring Times for Confirmed Worsening" plots. is that intended?

Yes, three options are presented to derive "Confirmed Worsening". The code differs but the final result (the `adtte`  dataset and plot) is the same. I'm not sure how we could avoid the repetition without worsening the readability. 

Any ideas?

> * in dark mode, the yellow highlight doesn't show up very clearly

I agree but I don't know how to change it. I couldn't find a solution in the documentation and the solutions proposed by AI didn't work.

Reviewer: > Yes, three options are presented to derive "Confirmed Worsening". The code differs but the final result (the `adtte` dataset and plot) is the same. I'm not sure how we could avoid the repetition without worsening the readability.
> 
> Any ideas?

It was a little confusing to me at first because I had to scan the plots side by side to see if i was missing something. i wonder if we should have the plot once and refer back to it with a link.

> I agree but I don't know how to change it. I couldn't find a solution in the documentation and the solutions proposed by AI didn't work.

Hmm. I guess it's a minor point, it's still sort of readable. At worst we could add a note/tooltip to view the plots in light mode..

Author: > It was a little confusing to me at first because I had to scan the plots side by side to see if i was missing something. i wonder if we should have the plot once and refer back to it with a link.

I see. Maybe we could point out at the beginning that three ways of deriving the same endpoint are shown. Then we don't need to add HTML code for linking to the plot and dataset (I think such links are not supported by R markdown). And it has the advantage for us as developer that we see that the code produces the correct results.

What do you think?

Reviewer: yes, good idea!

Author: I've added a paragraph before the subsections.

Reviewer: looks good, thanks

Author: @manciniedoardo , after investigating the bootstrap CSS file I've found the style to control the colors of plots in dark mode. What do you think?

Alternatively, we could leave the plot unaffected by the light switch.

Reviewer: nice job - now very readable in dark mode. happy to leave as you've implemented.

Reviewer: <img width="1029" height="942" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/848024ae-1632-4c83-9355-ae1285b3eb79" />

```

## Discrete Assessments, Negative Event

Many events require dedicated assessments to determine whether the event
occurred or not, e.g., lab assessments, tumor assessments, questionnaires, etc.

> I.e., information about the event is available only at these time points and it

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That is, information about the event is available only at these time points and it
```

I would just use the english translation of the latin acronym id est here

Author: updated

may happen that for some assessments it is unknown if the event occurred or not,
e.g., tumor scans were not readable or the score couldn't be calculated because
too few questions were answered. In this case, the event time is the time of the
first assessment where the event is recorded. For the censoring time it depends
on the type of the event. If the event is a negative event like death,

> worsening, adverse event, ..., the most conservative approach is to ignore time

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
worsening, adverse event, etc., the most conservative approach is to ignore time
```

Author: updated

> points where it is not known if the event occurred. I.e., the censoring time is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
points where it is not known if the event occurred, i.e., the censoring time is
```

Author: updated

censoring time is set to the time of the last assessment where it is known that

> the event didn't occur [^1].

Reviewer: Should we also say that happens if the event is a positive event?

Author: This is described in the next section. I'm not sure what I could add here without repeating the next section. Any suggestions?

Reviewer: no that's fair enough, you're right

[^1]: see for example [Clinical Trial Endpoints for the Approval of Non-Small
Cell Lung Cancer Drugs and Biologics Guidance for
Industry](https://www.fda.gov/media/116860/download)

```{r echo = FALSE}
plot_scenario(assessment_type = "discrete", event_type = "negative")
```

For the examples, we will use the following questionnaire ADaM dataset. The
variable `CHGCAT1` indicates whether the subject worsened, improved, or was
unchanged compared to baseline. For some records it is unknown whether the
subject worsened or not.

<details>

> <summary>`adqs_a` dataset</summary>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<summary>Expand to view the `adqs_a` dataset</summary>
```

Reviewer 2: could we apply this across the collapsed dataset.  i like this touch by the way - but I didn't see it at first.  thought it was a typo

Author: What about
<img width="518" height="268" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e0af6077-b9d9-43c3-a050-dc5adcc67af1" />
?

Author: @bms63 , what do you think?

Reviewer 2: love it!!

Author: I've updated all the dataset captions.

```{r, echo=FALSE}
dataset_vignette(
  adqs_a,
  display_vars = exprs(USUBJID, AVISIT, AVAL, CHG, CHGCAT1, ADT, ANL01FL)
)
```
</details>

```{r, echo=FALSE}

> plot_data(adqs_a)

Reviewer: E.g. I think this one would benefit from having a caption explaining what is being plotted and where to look

Author: done

```

A "time to worsening" parameter is derived by using `derive_param_tte()`. By
default a negative event is assumed, thus the `event_type` argument doesn't need
to be specified.

```{r}
trt_end <- censor_source(
  dataset_name = "adsl",
  date = TRTEDT
)

worsening <- event_source(
  dataset_name = "adqs",
  filter = CHGCAT1 == "WORSENED",
  date = ADT
)

valid_assessment <- censor_source(
  dataset_name = "adqs",
  filter = !is.na(CHGCAT1),
  date = ADT,
  order = exprs(PARAMCD)
)

adtte <- derive_param_tte(
  dataset_adsl = adsl,
  source_datasets = list(adsl = adsl, adqs = adqs_a),
  end_dates = list(trt_end),
  event_conditions = list(worsening),
  censor_conditions = list(valid_assessment),
  set_values_to = exprs(
    PARAMCD = "TTWORS",
    PARAM = "Time to worsening"
  )
)
```

<details>
<summary>`adtte` dataset</summary>
```{r, echo=FALSE}
dataset_vignette(adtte)
```
</details>

```{r, echo=FALSE}
plot_data(adqs_a, dataset_tte = adtte)
```

## Discrete Assessments, Positive Event

> For positive events like improvement, response, ..., the most conservative

Reviewer 2: We should replace the use of ... across the document with etc.

Author: updated

```{r, echo = FALSE}
plot_scenario(assessment_type = "discrete", event_type = "positive")
```

For positive events, the `event_type` argument of the `derive_param_tte()`
function can be set to `"positive"`.

```{r}
improvement <- event_source(
  dataset_name = "adqs",
  filter = CHGCAT1 == "IMPROVED",
  date = ADT
)

adtte <- derive_param_tte(
  dataset_adsl = adsl,
  source_datasets = list(adsl = adsl, adqs = adqs_a),
  end_dates = list(trt_end),
  event_type = "positive",
  event_conditions = list(improvement),
  censor_conditions = list(valid_assessment),
  set_values_to = exprs(
    PARAMCD = "TTIMPR",
    PARAM = "Time to improvement"
  )
)
```

<details>
<summary>`adtte` dataset</summary>
```{r, echo=FALSE}
dataset_vignette(adtte)
```
</details>

```{r, echo=FALSE}
plot_data(adqs_a, dataset_tte = adtte)
```

# Events Considering more than one Assessment

For some events it is necessary to consider more than one assessment. For
example, improvement or worsening could require a confirmation at a subsequent
assessment.

`derive_param_tte()` doesn't allow to consider subsequent records to decide
whether an event occurred or not. Thus the confirmation information needs to be

> derived in the input dataset, e.g., by deriving a variable or a parameter which

Reviewer: Is there anything to be said here about why you may choose a variable or a parameter? Or is it just preference? In either case I would explain a little more.

Author: Good question. I think CDISC allows both options. I've added some text. Is it helpful?

Maybe the ADaMIG group could have a look? @adcascone , what do you think?

Reviewer 3: > Good question. I think CDISC allows both options. I've added some text. Is it helpful?
> 
> Maybe the ADaMIG group could have a look? @adcascone , what do you think?

Happy to bring this to our next working group meeting! Great idea

Reviewer 3: Original question: 
The final goal is to derive a time-to-event parameter for confirmed worsening (of a score in ADQS). Confirmed worsening is defined as worsening at two consecutive assessments. To make the derivation of the time-to-event parameter less complex, we are suggesting to add:

- a flag variable to ADQS which flags assessments where the score worsened and it worsened at the next assessment as well or
- a parameter to ADQS where AVALC is set to "Y" for all assessments  where the score worsened and it worsened at the next assessment as well.

With the new flag or parameter, the assessments of confirmed worsening can be easily selected by a filter condition.
The question to the ADaMIG working group is: Does the ADaMIG prefer or forbid any of the two options? 
**There is nothing in the ADaMIG that forbids this - slight preference toward the flag variable but there is not a standard flag variable for it**

TAUG DKD flag is a similar situation about documenting records - CONFRMFL is the flag variable - @bundfussr perhaps it's worth looking at this analogous example?

Author: > TAUG DKD flag is a similar situation about documenting records - CONFRMFL is the flag variable - @bundfussr perhaps it's worth looking at this analogous example?

Where can I find this example?

Author: Thanks @bms63 for providing the link to the example.

The example looks very similar to what I have suggested. Should we add it as a reference?

Reviewer 2: I think that could be helpful - is there a publicly available reference as I think that one is behind the CDISC firewall?  maybe we can download to our repo and link to repo?

Author: I've added the reference in https://github.com/pharmaverse/admiral/pull/3121. The website is accessible for everyone. Just for downloading the pdf file you need to sign in. I don't think that we should download the pdf and publish it in our repo because that would circumvent the sign in.

  tmp_event_nr_var = tmp_event_nr,
  order = exprs(tmp_event_nr, ADT),
  mode = "first",
  events = list(
    event_joined(
      description = "Confirmed worsening event",
      dataset_name = "adqs",
      order = exprs(AVISITN),
      join_vars = exprs(CHGCAT1),
      join_type = "after",
      condition = CHGCAT1 == "WORSENED" & CHGCAT1.join == "WORSENED",
      keep_source_vars = exprs(ADT, TRTSDT, TRTEDT, STUDYID),
      set_values_to = exprs(CNSR = 0)
    ),
    event(
      description = "Censoring at last valid assessment",
      dataset_name = "adqs",
      condition = !is.na(CHGCAT1),
      keep_source_vars = exprs(ADT, TRTSDT, TRTEDT, STUDYID),
      order = exprs(ADT),
      mode = "last",
      set_values_to = exprs(CNSR = 1)
    )
  ),
  set_values_to = exprs(
    PARAMCD = "TTCWORS",
    PARAM = "Time to confirmed worsening",
    STARTDT = TRTSDT
  )
)
```

<details>
<summary>`adtte` dataset</summary>
```{r, echo=FALSE}
dataset_vignette(adtte)
```
</details>

```{r, echo=FALSE}
plot_data(adqs_a, dataset_tte = adtte)
```

# Combined Events

Some events are defined by a combination of more than one event, e.g., for

> progression free survival the event is defined as progression _or_ death.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some events are defined by a combination of more than one event, e.g., for a 
progression free survival event, the event is defined as progression _or_ death.
```

wasn't sure on this one

Author: @manciniedoardo , what do you think?

Reviewer: i think ok to leave as is

For these events which are combined by "or" separate `event_source()` objects
can be created for each event and then specified for the `event_conditions`
argument of `derive_param_tte()`. For events which are combined by "and" or more
complex combinations, a variable or parameter indicating whether the combined
event occurred or not needs to be derived in the input dataset.

> 

Reviewer: Could more be said here about why we have different approaches for the "and" and "or" case? Found myself wondering this while reading.

Author: I think there were two reasons:
- We needed to cover the very common PFS endpoint.
- You get the "or" combination more or less for free. When you select the first event record, you can just bind records for different events like progression and death to combine them with "or".

I'm not sure if it helpful to add this. What do you think?

Reviewer: i think ok to leave, thanks
